Draft: Practical Zephyr part 5 "Devicetree practice" (#412)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/practical_zephyr_04_dt_practice.md

```dts
&uart0 {
  compatible = "nordic,nrf-uarte";
  status = "okay";
  current-speed = <115200>;
  pinctrl-0 = <&uart0_default>;
  pinctrl-1 = <&uart0_sleep>;
  pinctrl-names = "default", "sleep";
};
```

Before we look at how `pinctrl` works, you might ask yourself why we need another mechanism when we have `gpios`, and what the difference between the two is. Couldn't we just use `gpios` and, e.g., pass _phandles_ for all the pins we need for our UART interface?

For some MCUs, like Nordic's nRF series, this might work since pin multiplexing for such MCUs is not restricted: On Nordic's MCUs it is possible to assign any functionality to any pin. Other MCUs (e.g., STM32) typically restrict this and clearly define possible alternate pin functions for all pins.

MCU manufacturers can be quite creative when it comes to pin multiplexing, and before Zephyr 3.0 pin multiplexing was entirely vendor-specific. With Zephyr 3.0 (and mostly adopted with version 3.1) Zephyr adopted the [Linux `pinctl`](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v4.13/driver-api/pinctl.html) concept as a _standardized_ way of assigning peripheral functions to pins in Devicetree - and called it `pinctrl`.

> There is, of course, still an overlap between `gpios` and `pinctrl` since both associate nodes with pins and their parameters (e.g., pull resistors). As a rule of thumb, `pinctrl` is generally used if the pin goes to a **peripheral** in the `/soc` node, whereas `gpios` are used if the pin is used by the application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is, of course, still an overlap between `gpios` and `pinctrl` since both associate nodes with pins and their parameters (e.g., pull resistors). As a rule of thumb, `pinctrl` is generally used if the pin goes to a **peripheral** in the `/soc` node, whereas `gpios` are used if the pin is used directly by the application.
```

Neither concept or approach is "better or worse", it is just what's implemented by hardware. As mentioned, MCU manufacturers can be very, very creative, and thus pin control will probably always remain vendor-specific.

### Basics and grouped pin control with the nRF52840

Let's bring up the `&uart0` node in the nRF52840 development kit's DTS file to save you some scrolling:

#### Pin control basics

`zephyr/boards/arm/nrf52840dk_nrf52840/nrf52840dk_nrf52840.dts`

```dts
&uart0 {
  compatible = "nordic,nrf-uarte";
  status = "okay";
  current-speed = <115200>;
  pinctrl-0 = <&uart0_default>;
  pinctrl-1 = <&uart0_sleep>;
  pinctrl-names = "default", "sleep";
};
```

> The first thing we notice are the two properties `pinctrl-0` and `pinctrl-1`. The property names don't really give a hint about their semantics. You could, of course, look at the matching binding and its include `zephyr/dts/bindings/pinctrl/pinctrl-device.yaml`, but in this case, the meaning of these properties is better described in [Zephyr's official documentation about pin control](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/hardware/pinctrl/index.html):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first thing we notice are the two properties `pinctrl-0` and `pinctrl-1`. The property names don't really give a hint about their semantics. You could, of course, look at the matching binding `zephyr/dts/bindings/pinctrl/pinctrl-device.yaml`, but in this case, the meaning of these properties is better described in [Zephyr's official documentation about pin control](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/hardware/pinctrl/index.html):
```

> **Note:** Naming child nodes of `pinctrl` using the format `group<m>` is only a convention for the _grouped approach_. In fact, for most drivers that follow this _grouped approach_ the actual node names within the `pinctrl` node is irrelevant: The drivers simply iterate over all child nodes regardless of their names.

Within each group, Nordic uses a vendor-specific format and thus also vendor-specific binding. We can find the referenced node `&pinctrl` in the included `nrf_common.dtsi` file, where the compatible binding is defined:

`zephyr/dts/arm/nordic/nrf_common.dtsi`

```dts
/ {
  pinctrl: pin-controller {
    compatible = "nordic,nrf-pinctrl";
  };
};
```

> Within this compatible binding, we see that `child-binding` and thus format of all children of `nordic,nrf-pinctrl` compatible nodes is defined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the `nordic,nrf-pinctrl.yaml` binding, we find a `child-binding` property to define the child nodes of `nordic,nrf-pinctrl`:
```
